The EDA field has leveraged the power of NN for various applications. The complexity of EDA tasks, including verification like LEC, provides a fertile ground for applying machine learning techniques to improve efficiency and robustness. In early work, these approaches focused mainly on data processing and process optimization. NN- based data argumentation and instance preprocessing are applied to accelerate the verification process [Huang et al., ]. Huang et al. further demonstrated the utility of NNs in EDA by designing a machine learning model to predict cut ranking for dealing with combinatorial optimization problems [Huang et al., 2022].  

As SAT solver is widely applied in EDA, the combination of NN and SAT problem has also been tried. Graph Neural Network has emerged as a powerful tool for capturing the relational information inherent in graph structures, which has naturally led to their application in SAT constraint problem- solving [Lopera et al., 2021]. The application of GNN is approached in two ways: end- to- end solving and heuristic solver guidance. In the first vein, GNN is trained to learn the underlying structure and patterns in SAT problems and to directly predict satisfying assignments or indicate unsatisfiability [Selsam et al., 2019] [Amizadeh et al., 2019] [Xu et al., 2018]. While the idea of using GNN as a solver is enticing, it also presents challenges. The complex nature of SAT problems leads to unreliability and low performance in models, especially in the industrial context. On the other hand, the use of GNN as heuristics to SAT solvers constitutes another effective application. In these approaches, GNN is typically employed to predict key aspects of the solving process, such as variable importance or ranking, thereby guiding the solver to solve efficiently [Selsam and Bjørner, 2019] [Zhang et al., 2021] [Li et al., 2018] [Balunovic et al., 2018]. Unlike the first approach, these methods just provide information that potentially accelerates the solving process while the solving process is still done by the solver. Thus the reliability and complexity of SAT problem solving is ensured. In light of existing methodologies, our work IB- Net, a model designed to enhance the robustness and efficiency of SAT solvers through heuristic guidance and explore solver- GNN interaction, aims to address SAT solver usage in specific industrial scenarios.