The Boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem is a fundamental computational problem that asks whether there exists an assignment of true or false values to a set of variables such that a given propositional Boolean formula evaluates to true. It is the first problem proven to be NP- complete (Cook, 1971) and has important applications in various fields, including planning (Kautz et al., 1992), hardware and software verification (Clarke et al., 2001), and cryptanalysis (Sun et al.,  

2020). The Maximum Satisfiability (MaxSAT) problem and its generalization, the Weighted MaxSAT problem, are the variants of SAT with a goal of maximizing the number of satisfied clauses or their weighted sum. By incorporating the notion of prioritizing or weighing different clauses, the Weighted MaxSAT problem provides a more general and flexible version of SAT and MaxSAT to tackle a wide range of real- world problems, such as scheduling (Thornton & Sattar, 1998), action model learning (Yang et al., 2007), computational protein design (Allouche et al., 2012) and resource allocation (Timm & Botha, 2022).  

Over the past several decades, SAT problems and their extensions have become central topics in computational logic and theoretical computer science. A wide array of solvers has been developed, with most of them relying on meticulously designed search algorithms (Audemard & Simon, 2018; Cai & Zhang, 2021; Biere & Fleury, 2022). With the rapid progress of deep learning, there has been a growing shift towards developing learning- based solvers. These learning- based methods aim to effectively extract hidden structures within problem instances and uncover underlying patterns from the data, thus reducing reliance on manually crafted and domain- specific strategies, and providing more adaptable and scalable solvers to tackle large and complex problem instances.  

Specifically, the applications of deep learning techniques to SAT problems have led to two main classes of approaches: end- to- end neural solvers and neural- guided solvers. The end- to- end approaches are typically designed to predict satisfiability or optimal assignments directly from the raw problem input. For example, the groundbreaking work NeuroSAT (Selsam et al., 2019) introduced an end- to- end framework that predicts satisfiability on random instances using a message passing neural network (MPNN). The study by (Cameron et al., 2020) represented SAT instances as permutation- invariant sparse matrices and compared the performances of the exchangeable architecture and MPNN. For the first time, it was demonstrated that end- to- end learning methods could achieve competitive performance in terms of satisfiability prediction. QuerySAT (Ozolins et al., 2022) proposed a neural SAT solver with a query mechanism that allows the network to make multiple solution trials and get feedback on the loss value towards better solutions.
The neural- guided solvers, on the other hand, integrate neural networks with traditional search frameworks to improve both the efficiency and solution quality of SAT solvers. Along this line, NeuroCore (Selsam & Bjørner, 2019) leveraged Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to predict unsatisfiable cores in SAT instances and further applied this prediction to periodically update the activity score of each variable in the Conflict- Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) solver. NLocalSAT (Zhang et al., 2021) employed a gated graph convolutional network (GGCN) to guide the initialization of assignments in the Stochastic Local Search (SLS) solver. Recently, NeuroBack (Wang et al., 2024) proposed a new approach by utilizing a graph transformer architecture to make offline neural predictions on backbone variable phases for refining the phase selection heuristic in CDCL solvers.  

For the MaxSAT problem, (Liu et al., 2023) was the pioneering work in exploring the use of GNNs for solving the MaxSAT problem. This work represented the MaxSAT problem as two kinds of factor graphs and studied the capability of typical GNN models in solving the MaxSAT problem from a theoretical perspective. Overall, it can be observed that GNNs have shown promising performance in solving both SAT and MaxSAT problems, however, the extension of these methods to the Weighted MaxSAT problem remains underdeveloped to our best knowledge. The main challenge comes from the uneven weight distribution in the Weighted MaxSAT problem. The addition of weights increases the complexity of the search space and also makes the design of effective heuristics more difficult. The neural model needs to learn how to prioritize high- weight clauses over others. Moreover, since a small change in the assignment could result in a significant change in the weighted sum, the hidden structural patterns within Weighted MaxSAT instances are much harder to learn.  

In this work, we consider the problem of designing a neural network solver for Weighted MaxSAT problems. Considering the intrinsic difficulties in learning the non- linear dependency and sensitive objective function in the Weighted MaxSAT problem, we formulate our learning- based framework HyperSAT by integrating hypergraph representation, cross- attention mechanism, and multi- objective loss design. We model the Weighted MaxSAT instance as a hypergraph. The positive and negative literals of a variable are represented as separate nodes, and each clause is represented as a hyperedge, with an associated weight equal to the weight of the clause. The hypergraph convolutional network (HyperGCN) is utilized as the learning model, and a specific cross- attention mechanism is designed to capture the logical interplay between the positive and negative literal node features of the same variable. In addition, we design an unsupervised multi- objective loss function to optimize the learning model. Besides the intrinsic optimization objective of the Weighted MaxSAT problem, a shared representation constraint ob  

jective is introduced to ensure that the representations of positive and negative literals of a variable are as distinct as possible in the feature space. We have tested our model on several random Weighted MaxSAT datasets in different settings. The experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms baseline methods across various datasets, achieving significantly better performance. This work provides a new perspective on solving the Weighted MaxSAT problem using learning- based methods, with the hope that the results can offer preliminary knowledge into the capability of neural networks for solving Weighted MaxSAT problems in the future.  

In summary, we make the following contributions:  

- We propose HyperSAT, an innovative neural approach that uses an unsupervised hypergraph neural network model to solve Weighted MaxSAT problems. This is the first work to predict the solution of the Weighted MaxSAT problem with HyperGCN in an end-to-end fashion.- We propose a hypergraph representation for Weighted MaxSAT instances and design a cross-attention mechanism along with a shared representation constraint loss function to capture the logical relationships between positive and negative literal nodes within the hypergraph.- We conduct an extensive evaluation of the proposed HyperSAT on multiple Weighted MaxSAT datasets with different distributions. The experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of HyperSAT.