AutoSAT [29]. The paper introduces a framework that leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to automatically optimize heuristics in Conflict- Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) SAT solvers. The authors address the challenge of manually designing and tuning heuristic functions in modern CDCL solvers, which is time- consuming and expert- dependent. Instead of generating solvers from scratch, AutoSAT operates within a modular search space comprising nine key heuristic functions (e.g., branching, restart, and clause management) derived from an existing CDCL solver. The framework employs LLMs to iteratively refine these heuristics through two search strategies: a greedy hill climber (GHC) and a \((1 + 1)\) Evolutionary Algorithm (EA), where LLMs generate candidate code modifications guided by performance feedback. All configurations of this algorithm take the default used in [29] for fair comparison.  

LLM4Solver [30]. The paper proposes a novel framework that integrates large language models (LLMs) with evolutionary search to automate the design of high- performance diving heuristics for exact combinatorial optimization (CO) solvers. The key challenge addressed is the inefficiency of traditional manual and learning- based approaches in navigating the vast, discrete algorithm space for CO solver components like diving heuristics, which require domain expertise and suffer from poor generalization. The core methodology leverages LLMs as prior- knowledge- guided generators to produce candidate algorithms encoded as interpretable score functions, while a derivative- free evolutionary framework (single- or multi- objective) optimizes these candidates through iterative
population- based search. The algorithm space is defined via 13 interpretable variable features, with LLMs enabling code- level manipulations during initialization, crossover, and mutation. We slightly adjusted **LLM4Solver**’s optimization focus from diving heuristics to cut selection for MILP solver for fair comparison with previous work [15, 16]. All configurations of this algorithm take the default used in [15, 16] for fair comparison.