Using machine learning (ML), especially deep learning, to solve fundamental problems in artificial intelligence (AI) such as constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) and combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) has attracted great attention. For example, ML techniques play an important role in SATzilla [1], a portfolio- based Boolean- satisfaction- problem (SAT) solver that is able to select
different algorithms depending on the characteristics of SAT instances. Convolutional neural networks have been applied to predict the behavior of SAT instances, see [2] and [3]. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been used to learn a probability distribution to sample the solution space directly or learn greedy heuristics for approximation algorithms of COPs under the framework of reinforcement learning, see [4], [5], [6], and [7].  

Our work differs from these approaches in that GNNs are used to learn branching heuristics to enhance exact- backtracking- search methods. While human- designed branching heuristics, such as the minimum- remaining- values (MRV) heuristic, have long been used in backtracking- based solvers, past research indicated that their effectiveness is problem- instance- dependent. Inspired by [8], which (to our best knowledge) is the first work to introduce the probabilistic method into GNNs, we propose a new approach to apply the probabilistic method on GNNs to find subgraphs that satisfy certain combinatorial constraints in a given graph. The node features output by GNNs are interpreted as the probability distributions on vertices under which the information entropy is used in the branching heuristic.  

In this paper, we focus on applying this GNN- based approach to solve the dominating- clique problem. We choose the dominating- clique problem as our current research interest for the following two reasons.  

- In [9], Culberson et al. study the phase transition of the dominating clique in \(G(n, p)^{1}\) and propose a solver for finding a dominating clique. An interesting observation in their empirical studies on the random instances at the phase transition is that the variance of the number of branches of the solvers is extremely small as compared with the average number of branches, suggesting that such hard-problems instances seem to resist commonly-used and human-designed branching heuristics;- Previous approaches, such as the framework in [8], attempt to focus on problems that the properties of solutions are defined locally, e.g. the maximum-clique problem, while the dominating clique problem is an interesting example of problems where a solution as a subset of vertices/variables has to satisfy some non-trivial additional global conditions defined by all the vertices in a graph.  

This paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces the definition of dominating cliques and our probabilistic- method GNN. Section 3 discusses the details of our work. In Section 4, we provide and discuss experimental results. In the last section, we conclude with a brief discussion of potential future work.