The Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT) is a cornerstone problem of theoretical computer science. It can be succinctly described as the problem of proving logical formulas. Such a problem can consist in making a decision (is the formula satisfiable) or providing an assignment (what is the bitstring that satisfies the formula). SAT plays a foundational role in complexity theory as the first NP- Complete problem[13]. Furthermore, many other combinatorial optimization problems such as matching, routing, and covering can be reduced to SAT [24], which provides a way to characterize the hardness of these problems. Secondly, many real- world tasks such as circuit verification, automated planning, and software testing, are routinely cast into SAT form [31] and solved by optimized algorithms [6, 7]. Beyond computer science, a large body of work in the field of statistical physics has both studied typical- case theoretical properties [26, 36, 50] and proposed various solvers [2, 8, 30].  

Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [20, 45] have emerged as a new competitor in combinatorial problem solving by learning over the graph representations of these problems [10]. This tendency has also extended to learning GNNs- based SAT solvers [12, 19, 40, 46]. By representing logical formulas as bipartite graphs that connect variables to clauses, GNNs can be trained end- to- end on both decision and assignment scenarios. Nevertheless, despite their flexibility, these neural solvers remain fragile in practice. Their performance deteriorates on problems that are anecdotally or formally known to be of increasing (algorithmic) difficulty, e.g., larger \(k\) values in random \(k\) - SAT [28, 33].  

Numerous studies have shown that GNNs suffer from two prevalent feature learning issues given the input data structure: oversmoothing [27] and oversquashing [1]. Oversmoothing refers to the idea that repeated aggregation causes node representations to become increasingly similar, eventually making them indistinguishable. This effect often imposes a practical upper bound on GNN depth. Oversquashing occurs when information from an exponentially expanding neighborhood must be
compressed into finite- dimensional embeddings. This bottleneck severely restricts the ability of GNNs to model long- range dependencies, and can be thought of as a vanishing gradient problem.  

Given that the difficulty of SAT can actually be understood intuitively as being proportional to the number of long- range dependencies between nodes, we question whether learning GNN- based solvers on these difficult problems is impacted by oversquashing. Recent geometric analyses propose that oversquashing is directly tied to negative Ricci Curvature (RC) of the underlying graph [38, 47]. These insights invite a fundamental question: Can graph RC serve as a predictive and constructive notion in unraveling novel hardness concepts for GNN- based SAT solvers?  

In this work, we address this question by studying the typical- case behavior of particular instantiations of graph RC on random \(k\) - SAT problems represented as bipartite graphs. Our starting point is the observation that edges of bipartite graphs are always non- positively curved. We show that, on average, the edges become more negatively curved as problems get harder, and less negatively curved as they become easier. Finally, we derive an exact expression for the average Balanced Forman Curvature (BFC) in the limit of unsolvable problems, from which we derive a connection between curvature and oversquashing in GNNs- based SAT solvers, following the theory of Topping et al. [47]. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first successful attempt at a theoretical characterization of the limitations of GNN- based SAT solvers.  

To validate our theory, we perform experiments on random 3- and 4- SAT problems, and also on a vast array of datasets coming from the recent benchmark of Li et al. [28]. Firstly, we observe a phase transition- like phenomenon in random 3- SAT solving probability as a function of the mean and variance of the curvature. We further affirm the aforementioned limitations by rewiring only the testing graphs of the benchmarks at test- time to increase their average BFC, and show that these rewired problems become much easier to solve. Finally, we find that heuristics based on the BFC of a dataset correlate extremely well with generalization error, unlike the average clause density, which is typically used to characterize the hardness of a single instance. Overall, our findings suggest that GNN- based SAT solvers have two distinct types of hardness: the hardness of learning representations in negatively curved structures, followed by the well- established algorithmic hardness of SAT. We conclude by relating our findings with modeling principles and design choices of existing approaches.  

Outline. The remainder of this article is structured as follows: In Section 2, we provide a recap of the most relevant concepts discussed in the paper: random \(k\) - SAT, GNNs, and graph RC. Section 3.1 presents the main theoretical results, including an in- depth discussion on how oversquashing affects GNNs- based solvers. We then demonstrate the experimental evidence in Section 4. Finally, we provide a discussion regarding current design principles and future work in Section 5.