Combinatorial optimization (CO) is a multidisciplinary field ranging from optimization to artificial intelligence. The goal of CO is to find optimal solutions from finite possible options where exhaustive enumeration cannot be accomplished. Graphs are the most common research objects in CO. Typical CO problems on graphs include traveling salesman problems (TSP) [1], Max- Cut problems [2], and graph coloring problems [3]. Solving CO on graphs can benefit many real- world applications, such as transportation logistics [4] and telecommunications [5].  

Solving COs on graphs is extremely difficult due to their discrete property and high computational costs. For many decades, researchers have made many efforts to develop various algorithms to solve COs on graphs. For example, branch and bound [6] is a traditional exact algorithm that gradually divides the solution space into subspaces and uses bounds to prune possible solutions that exceed the bounds. Unfortunately, these traditional exact algorithms encounter excessive computational burdens as the scales of problems increase [7]. Recently, deep learning has developed as an effective tool for COs, inspiring the emergence of the category of learning- based methods for solving COs. Particularly, graph neural networks (GNNs) [8- 10] are advanced deep learning models designed for graph- structure data, which have been successfully applied to COs on graphs [11- 13]. In general, the graphs in CO problems are first fed into GNNs so that the high- level features can be extracted. Then, the predictions generated from features serve as feasible solutions or can be further used to guide the searching process of the heuristic learning process [14, 15]. Learning- based methods extract more useful knowledge to reduce the search space, which can be used to effectively and efficiently solve COs on graphs. Besides, the data- driven manner is more adaptive to real- world problems when real data is available.  

However, current GNN models for CO problems still face several challenges. First, directly modeling CO with graphs is intuitive but not necessarily accurate. Although graphs can capture relationships between objects, they ignore the mathematical logicality and properties inside COs. Therefore, constructing learning methods over original graphs often results in insufficient problem- solving abilities. Second, current methods are usually designed to solve a single CO problem on graphs. Nevertheless, different COs on graphs may share the same graphs and leverage similar GNN backbones for feature extraction. It is quite beneficial to explore whether the transferability of knowledge exists among different problems. Moreover, for real- world problems on graphs, the data collected for training GNNs is often limited, it is essential to leverage data from other problems that may have common knowledge to improve the generalization ability of GNNs.  

To address the above issues, we propose in this paper a unified pre- training and adaptation framework for COs on graphs. The core idea is to develop a generalizable and transferable GNN framework from which all COs can be benefited. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to find out the common knowledge and properties of all CO problems on graphs that can be extracted by GNNs and used for different problems. We notice that using graphs to formulate CO omits logical information that is usually more general and common for all problems. Inspired by this observation, we propose to leverage the maximum satisfiability problems (Max- SAT) to bridge different CO problems on graphs. Max- SAT is a classic problem containing propositional logic formulas that can be used to describe additional logic information beyond simple relations on graphs. With this unified representation, we further adopt a pre- training process and a fine- tuning process based on domain adaptation to extract general features and utilize the transferability between different problems. Our framework can be adaptive to all CO problems that can be transferred to Max- SAT problems and is also suitable for various GNN architectures, which exhibit superior flexibility and versatility.  

To be concrete, we first use the Max- SAT problem as an intermediate problem by which we can transform graphs from different COs to clauses and formulas. We can construct bipartite graphs from these clauses in Max- SAT that not only capture logical information but also can be adaptive to different COs on graphs. In the training stage, we can generate abundant clauses from certain Max- SAT problems without considering the original CO and transform them into bipartite graphs for pre- training. Due to the generic nature of Max- SAT, the pre- trained model is equipped with better initialization. Then, we
use the original CO and Max- SAT to construct an adaptation framework with adversarial training for fine- tuning, which can further utilize the transferable information in Max- SAT. In both the pre- training and fine- tuning stages, the graph attention networks are leveraged as backbones to extract information in bipartite graphs transformed from COs on graphs and Max- SAT. The bipartite graph attention networks separately consider the aggregation of clauses and variables, which can better capture the dependencies between variables and clauses with different neighbor aggregation processes.  

To summarize, the contributions of this work are as follows:  

(1) We propose a unified pre-training and adaptation framework based on Max-SAT that can learn generalizable and transferable information to benefit the solving of COs on graphs.  

(2) We propose to use Max-SAT to bridge various COs on graphs, by which all problems can be represented as a unified form. The Max-SAT instances also carry additional logical relationships that can be further utilized by GNNs.  

(3) We design a pre-training and domain adaptation architecture to extract generalizable and transferable features based on instances generated from the Max-SAT and COs on graphs. This framework is versatile to various COs and can be used to boost the ability to solve these problems.  

(4) We evaluate our method on both synthetic datasets and open benchmarks. The numerical results demonstrated the effectiveness of our framework in solving COs on graphs.  

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the learning methods for COs and popular GNN architectures for feature extraction on graphs. Section 3 introduces the problem transfer, pre-training, and fine-tuning procedures in our framework and summarizes the overall algorithms for training. The experiments that aim to address our three main claims are listed in Section 4. We conclude our work in Section 5.