Most DLAs are designed for solving combinatorial problems in graph theory. (Sato, Yamada, and Kashima 2019) has employed DLAs to clarify the approximation ratios of GNNs for several NP- hard problems on graphs such as minimum dominating set and minimum vertex cover. This also encourages us to analyze the capability of GNNs to solve MaxSAT problem with the help of a DLA. As the DLA for MaxSAT has not been studied in the literature, we design an algorithm that aligns well with the message passing process described in Section 3, and the pseudo code is shown in Algorithm 1.  

This algorithm accepts the description of a MaxSAT problem instance as input, and returns the assignment of literals, while the value of objective (i.e., the number of satisfied clauses) is easy to compute from it. Following the rules of DLA, the literals and clauses do not have any information about the problem initially. \(W\) and \(S\) correspond to the states of literals and clauses, respectively. In line 4, the message is passed from literals to clauses, so that each clause is aware of the literals it contains, and stores the information into \(S\) . Next, in lines 5- 8, the message is generated by clauses and sent to literals. Finally, the assignment of each literal is decoded from \(W\) by a greedy- like method. It can be seen that the algorithm only carries out one round of communication. It is interesting to know whether a single- layer GNN may also have some capabilities to solve the MaxSAT problem theoretically. This can be analyzed by aligning it with the algorithm.  

Theorem 1. There exists a single- layer GNN to solve the
MaxSAT problem, which is guaranteed to have an approximation ratio of \(1 / 2\) .  

Proof. We give a proof sketch here because of the space limitation, and the full proof is available in Appendix. Firstly, we show that there exists a single- layer GNN model that can align with the proposed distributed local algorithm (Algorithm 1), so that every part of the algorithm can be effectively approximated by a component of GNN. This implies that the GNN model can achieve the same performance with the algorithm when solving MaxSAT problem. Next, we prove that it is a \(1 / 2\) - approximation algorithm. The picking operation of literal (line 6) is equivalent to transforming the original problem into another, where each clause only contains one literal. Given a solution, the number of satisfied clauses of the original problem is at least as large as that of the new one, so we get the approximation ratio by analyzing the new Max1SAT problem. It is not hard to find that the algorithm has a guarantee that at least half of the clauses are satisfied for any Max1SAT instance. \(\square\)  

The proposed DLA can be considered as a candidate explanation for why a single- layer GNN model works and generalizes on the MaxSAT instances. The methodologies and results may also serve as a basis for future work to make theoretical progress on this task, such as explaining the improvement of capability as the number of GNN layers increases in the experiments and finding a tighter bound.