Although the mainstream approaches for solving combinatorial problems, not limited to SAT or MaxSAT, are based on the search algorithms from symbolism, there have always been attempts trying to tackle these problems through data- driven techniques. A class of research is to integrate machine learning model in the traditional search framework, which has made progress on a number of problems such as mixed integer programming (MIP) (Khalil et al. 2016), satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) (Balunovic, Bielik, and Vechev 2018) and quantified boolean formulas (QBF) (Lederman et al. 2020). Here, we work on building end- to- end models which do not need the aid of search algorithm. The earliest research work can be traced back to the Hopfield network (Hopfield and Tank 1985) to solve TSP problem. Recently, many variants of neural networks have been proposed, which directly learn to solve combinatorial problems. (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015) introduces Pointer Net, a sequential model that performs well on solving TSP and convex hull problems. (Khalil et al. 2017) uses the com  

bination of reinforcement learning and graph embedding, and learns greedy- like strategies for minimum vertex cover, maximum cut and TSP problems.  

With the development of graph neural networks, there have been a series of work that uses GNN models to solve combinatorial problems. An important reason is that many of such problems are directly defined on graph, and in general the relation between variables and constraints can be naturally represented as a bipartite graph. Except for the mentioned NeuroSAT (Selsam et al. 2019) and its improvement, there have been some efforts learning to solve TSP (Prates et al. 2019), pseudo- Boolean (Liu et al. 2020) and graph coloring (Lemos et al. 2019) problems with GNN- based models. The results indicate that GNNs have become increasingly appealing alternatives in solving combinatorial problems. Moreover, there are also some well- organized literature reviews on this subject, such as (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2021), (Cappart et al. 2021) and (Lamb et al. 2020).